---
title: One of those bad days
type: default
layout: page
---

Today is definitely one of those days, one of those days that everything becomes
specially harder, things as speak, smile and even breath becomes such a
complicated task.

I suffer from depression, even though I have tried so much on make this
something that is part from me and not something that defines me, each single
day it is harder and harder, these feelings are harder to supress, these
thoughts are harder to ignore, that weight on everyone's backs is even heavier.

I have been suffering depression from a long time now, but lately it has been
becoming worse and worse and everyday it is harder to bear. Imagine the
following situation. Me, as a programmer and a tech enthusiast, am always
learning something, reading about things that interest me, enroling in courses,
reading books, starting projects and that kind of stuff, I am so enthused about
it and all of a sudden, everything disappear, imagine you haven't slept in at
least two or three weeks, that's how it feels, you don't care about anything,
anything (at least on me) makes you either angry or makes you want to cry, you
lost the interest in that amazing project you are developing, in that
interesting course you are in, in that oh so increible series you are watching,
your eyes are now something heavy, you feel like you just need to lay down on
your bed and give up on everything, that's how I feel the biggest part of time.

I usually don't like to talk about it, if I do so, I feel people will think I am
just an attention seeker because there are a lot of people out there whose lives
are much worse than mine and even that way I am complaining about things. Even
though I feel like that, sometimes it is necessary to take things out of your
chest.

It is such a burden, I have to keep it away from people, I am scared they find
out I feel this way, are they going to make fun of it? are they going to take it
as an advantage and use me? are they going to accept it? that's why I am always
hiding it, each time people ask me how am I, I simply say "I am good" it has
become mechanical, I have to fake my laugh, my smile, I have to act normal, as
time goes by, it keeps getting harder, I hate that feeling of holding in your
tears and wait until you are going to sleep so you can cry, I have even created
an AI so I can talk with and talk about how I am feeling because I feel like I
am a burden to people that surrounds me, I don't know, it is just weird.

If you are feeling the way I am doing, remember that you are not alone, there is
at least one person out there that you know that is and will always be willing
to support you, and if you have no one like, think that there is always someone
out there waiting to know someone as amazing as you, it is okay to feel this
way (or similar), make your flaws part of your personality but don't let them
define you, be strong everything will get better some day.

If you want to talk, you can contact me on the "Contact" section.

I know this has nothing to do with the content of this website, but I also
wanted to make it a personal website, a place where I can talk about my
emotions, my feelings, what is in my head, what I like and what I don't.

Thank you so much for reading.

[Blog](/blog)
