---
title: Home
type: default
layout: page
---

This is Zea.

This is my personal website, here I will post notes about things I learn,
languages, programming, computer science, hacking, philosophy and some other
things related to me. I will also use this website to put into words what is in
my head and hope I can help other people in several ways, by helping them to
learn new things or to give them emotional support. I hope you like the content
of this website.

## Computer Science

I love to know how things work under the hood, I have enroled into a plenty of
online courses and read several books that teach you how different things about
computers work, that's what you will find in this section, you will learn how
things work in a very detail and thorough way.

## Programming

I am always reading a book about programming, enrolled in a course or something
like that, I will post things there regularly about things I learn, things I
don't want to forget, or simply things that I think could be helpful for other
people.

## Hacking

In this section you can find guides/entries about kernel hacking and
cybersecurity.

## Languages

I love to learn new languages (I speak - as of date of this being written -
three languages: Spanish, English and Italian) here you can find notes about all
those languages.

## Blog

This is more of a personal space, I will regularly do updates about my life, my
health, things I have made, things I am and am not proud of an that kind of
things.

## Guides

This place holds several "courses" about programming, as in _Computer Science_
there is only theory and in _Programming_ there are broad courses about
different languages.

In guides you will find courses to develop projects on those languages.

## About Me

This is a section where I will post some information about me.

## Philosophy

Learn about my philosophy, free software, anarchism and all those things that
are in my mind.

## Good Reads

A place where I will post regularly books I would recommend you to read.

## Donate

Do you like this website? Would you like to contribute? You can help donating in
several different payment methods, I would be so grateful.

## Contact

Would you like to talk with me? Do you have any question? Feel free to send me a
mail or a message through my Jabber account.

**Note:** I took this amazing design from [this website](https://kill-9.xyz/).
