---
title: Comparatives - A2 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

Previously we used adjectives (words that describe someone or something) to
describe people and their personalities. Now we are going to learn how to make
comparisons between people or objects.

When we want to say that something is "**more ... than something else**" we use
the word "**più**" (more). Here's the structure: **person/object + verb + "più"
\+ adjective + "di/del/della" etc + person/object**.

- Maria è **più gentile di** Giulia. (Maria is kinder than Giulia.)
- Il russo è **più difficile dello** spagnolo. (Russian is more difficult than
the Spanish)

When we want to say that something is "**less ... than something else**" we use
the word "**meno**" (less). The structure is the same: **person/object + verb +
"più" + adjective + "di/del/della" etc + person/object.**

- Cristina è **meno timida di** Cinzia. (Cristina is less shy than Cinzia.)
- Lo spagnolo è **meno difficile dell'**arabo. (Spanish is less difficult than
Arabic)

If we want to say that something/someone is **the same as** something/someone
else, we can choose between two structures. Have a look at the sentences below,
they both mean "She's as intelligent as Marco", but the first one is more
common. We can omit the words in brackets.

- **(tanto)** + adj. + **quanto**: Lei è (tanto) intelligente quanto Marco.
- **(così)** + adj. + "**come**": Lei è (così) intelligente come Marco.

Sometimes, when we are making comparisons, instead of "di" we use "**che**".
Have a look at the most common contexts where we use "che":

- When we compare **the characteristics of one person/thing** using **two
adjectives**, e.g. Sandra è più **intelligente che simpatica**. (Sandra is more
intelligent than nice.)
- When we compare **two actions**, e.g. **Leggere** un libro è più bello **che
guardare** un film. (Reading a book is nicer than watching a film.)
