---
title: Indirect object pronouns - A2 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

In this unit we will look at "**indirect object pronouns**". We use them to
answer the question "A chi?" (To whom?) and always put them before the verb.
Here are two examples with the the regular verb "**sembrare**" (to seem).

- **Mi** sembra bello! (It seems nice to me.)
- Come **ti** sembra? (How does it seem to you?)

Below, the singular indirect object pronouns are in bold. Remember, in a format
context we address people with "lei", so the formal indirect object pronoun will
be "lei".

- **mi**: a me (to me)
- **ti**: a te (to you, singular)
- **gli**: a lui (to him)
- **le**: a lei (to her / to you, formal)

Another regular verb we use these pronouns with is "interessare" (to be
interested / to have an interest):

- Ti interessa la cucina? (Are you interested in cooking?)
- Gli interessano i film giapponesi? (Is he interested in Japanese films?)

And here are the **plural indirect object pronouns**:

- **ci**: A noi (to us)
- **vi**: A voi (to you, plural)
- **gli**: A loro (to them)

Of course, to answer the question "A chi?" we can also use **a me, a te, a lui /
lei**, etc. These are usually placed at the beginning of the sentenced, and they
are used to emphasise.

- **Vi** interessa il cinema? (Are you interested in cinema?)
- **A me** interessa, ma **a lei** no. (I am interested in it, but she isn't)
- Si, **mi** interessa! (Yes, I am interested in it!)

We ***NEVER*** use both the indirect object pronouns and "**a me**", "**a te**",
"**a lui / lei**", etc. It's either one or the other!

- "A me interessa" **OR** "Mi interessa"
- "A te sembra" **OR** "Ti sembra"
- ***NEVER***: "A me mi interessa"
