---
title: The verb "piacere" - A2 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

We've just learned two verbs that go with indirect object pronouns (mi, ti, gli
/ le, ci, vi gli) or with indirect objects (i.e.: "al mio amico", "a Giulia",
etc): "interessare" and "sembrare". In this unit we'll learn an **irregular
verb** that has a similar structure: the verb "piacere" (lit. to be pleasing).
Have a look at the sentences below:

- Questo libro **mi sembra** bello. (This book seems nice to me.)
- **Ci interesa** la storia antica. (We are interested in ancient history.)
- **Mi piace** l'arte moderna. (I like modern art.)

Now let's have a look at the different forms of the verb "piacere". For example,
"**io piaccio** alla tua amica", which means "your friend likes me".

- io **piaccio**
- tu **piaci**
- lui/lei **piace**
- noi **piacciamo**
- voi **piacete**
- loro **piacciono**

For example:

- Io piaccio alla tua amica. (Your friend likes me.)
- Tu gli piaci. (He likes you.)
- Mi piace molto il caffè. (I like coffee a lot.)

The subject of the sentences is **what or who is liked**. As you can see below,
the subject ("io") is the person who is liked. So, the verb "piacere" needs to
agree with "io" and not with "gli".

- **io** (subject) **gli** (indirect object pronoun) **piaccio** (verb).

More examples:

- Vi piacciamo? (Do you like us?)
- Voi piacete ai nostri amici. (Our friends like you.)

"**Piace**" and "**piacciono**" are the most frequently used forms of "piacere",
given that we usually like one thing / person or many things / people. Have a
look at these examples:

- Ti **piace** la cucina francese? (Do you like French cuisine?)
- Ci **piacciono** i film drammatici. (We like drama films.)
- Gli **piacciono** le commedie. (He likes comedies.)

The verb "dispiacere" follows the same structure of "piacere". It literally
means "to be unpleasing (to someone)" but we use it to say we are sorry and we
mainly use it in the third person singular ("**dispiace**"): "Mi **dispiace**."
(I'm sorry.), "Ci **dispiace**." (We're sorry.)

For example:

- Domani mattina non posso, mi dispiace.
