---
title: Present tense regular verbs - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

The most basic form of a verb is called an infinite. In Italian, are divided
into three main groups according to the ending of an infinite. We have already
seen a few verbs ending in "are", such as lavorare and we are now going
to learn about those ending in "ere" and in "ire".

are: parlare
ere: scrivere
ire: offrire

It is important to know the stem of a verb in order to conjugate it. You can
find the stem by removing the ending ("-are", "-ere", "-ire") from the
infinitive.

| Infinite | Stem |
| -------- | ---- |
| Parlare | Parl- |
| Scrivere | Scriv- |
| Offrire | Offr- |

As you already know, in Italian, verb have different endings depending on who
performs the action. Regular verbs always follow the same pattern. Regular
verbs in the "**-are**" group always take the endings shown below. Here you
can see the conjugation of the verb "parlare" as an example:

io parl-o
tu parl-i
lui/lei parl-a
noi parl-iamo
voi parl-ate
loro parl-ano

The verbs in the "-ere" and "-ire" groups take the same ending with all
pronouns except for "voi". You can see the difference between them with the
verbs "scrivere" and "offrire".

| Subject | -ere Verb | -ire Verb |
| ------- | --------- | --------- |
| io      | Scrivo    | Offro     |
| tu      | Scrivi    | Offri     |
| lui/lei | Scrive    | Offre     |
| Noi     | Scriviamo | Offriamo  |
| Voi     | Scrivete  | Offrite   |
| Loro    | Scrivono  | Offrono   |

Careful! For some "**-ire" verbs**, we need to add "**-isc**" to the stem and
the regular ending with the forms "io", "tu", "lui/lei" and "loro". The endings
stay the same. A few verbs that work like this are "finire" (to finish),
"preferire" (to prefer) and "capire" (to understand). Have a look at the
conjugation of "capire" below and try to conjugate the others yourself.

io cap-**isc**-o
tu cap-**isc**-i
lui/lei cap-**isc**-e
noi cap-iamo
voi cap-ite
loro cap-**isc**-ono
