---
title: Prepositions of place - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

In this unit we will look at the prepositions "**di**, **a**, **da**" and
"**in**". These prepositions can be used to talk about places, and they
always go before the noun that refers to a place.

- Martino vive **in** Italia.
- Voi andate in vacanza **a** Cuba?
- Giacomo e Davide sono **di** Palermo.

We use "**in**" with _continents, nations and regions_ while "**a**" usually
goes before names of _cities and islands_. Careful though: Sicily and Sardinia
(the two main Italian islands) take the preposition "in".

- Martino vive **in** Italia.
- Lucia vive **in** Sardegna.
- Voi andate in vacanza **a** Cuba?

Normally, when we talk about our home we use the preposition "**a**": "Ciao,
vado a casa". We use "**in casa**" only to specify something / someone is
inside the house.

- Giacomo e Davide sono a casa
- Il gato è **in casa** o in giardino?

"**Di**" and "**da**" indicate the origins of something or someone, and where
someone or something is from, but they are used with different structures:

- **esere** + **DI** + **city**: Loro **sono di Londra**.
- **venire** + **DA (with article)** + **nation**: Vengono **dalla Francia**.
- **venire** + **DA (without article)** + **city**: Noi veniamo **da
Barcellona**.

When a preposition is followed by an article, it becomes one word. Don't
worry about this now, we will learnhow to form them later on in the course.
Just know that:

- Da+la = **dalla** - Noi veniamo dalla Francia.
- Da+il = **dal** - Lui viene dal Brasile.

To ask someone where they are from, we use the same structure:

- **Di** dove **sei**?
- **Da** dove **vieni**?

Of course, we can always use an adjective to describe nationalities, as we
already learned. Remember, the adjectives **do not** have to start with
an upper-case letter!

- Anna è russa. Viene dalla Russia.
- Giacomo e Davide sono italiani. Vengono dall'italia.
