---
title: Prepositions of time - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

Great! Now that you are able to talk about days of week, months and numbers...
In this unit, we will look at some "prepositions of time", which are words that
allow you to talk about the present and near future.

- Studio italiano da quattro anni
  I've been studying Italian for 4 years

- Inizio a lavorare alle due
  I start work at two

- La scuola è parte dal lunedì al venerdì
  The school is open from Monday to Friday

- Vado in Crazia per tre settimana
  I am going to Croatia for three weeks

- Inizio a lavorare tra due ore
  I am starting work in two hours

"**Da**" on its own indicates an action that has begun in the past and is still
ongoing, or will begin in the future and does not have an end.

- Studio italiano da quattro anni
- Da lunedì sono a dieta

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Da | From / For / Since |

We use "**a**" to talk about the specific time an action happens or will happen.
We only use "a" for hours and months.

- Luca parte domani alle sei
- Io vado in vacanza a giugno

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| A       | In / at |

We use "**da ... a**" or "**da ... fino a**" to talk about an action that begins
and ends at a given time.

- Le vacanze estive durano da giugno a settembre
- Giulio lavora dalle 9 alle 17

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Da... a | From... to |

As usual, the prepositions "da" and "a" can be combined with the article to form
one word (da+la: dalla; a+la: alla;)

We use "**per**" to talk about the duration of an ongoing action.

- Alice va ain Cina per tre settimane
- Studio per tre ore prima di uscire

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Per     | For |

We use "**tra / fra**" to talk about the time that will go by between the
present and the beginning of a future action.

- Usciamo tra venti minuti?
- Vado in palestra tra due ore

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Tra / Fra | In |
