---
title: The verbs "potere" and "sapere" - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

In this unit, we will look at two more irregular verbs: **Potere** (to be able
to / can) - we use this verb to talk about the possibility of doing something
when it depends on external circumstances. **Sapere** (to know / to be able to
/ can) = we use this verb to talk about a skill or an ability we've acquired,
something we have learned to do, or knowledge.

These verbs are often accompanied by a verb in the infinitive form. Have a look
at the examples below:

- Potere: Non **posso** guidare, ho dimenticato gli occhiali (I can't drive, I
forgot my glasses!)
- Sapere: Io non **so** guidare, e tu? (I can't drive, can you?)

These are the forms of the verb "potere":

| Pronoun | Verb |
| ------- | ---- |
| io | posso |
| tu | puoi |
| lui, lei | può |
| noi | possiamo |
| voi | potete |
| loro | possono |

We also use the verb "**potere**" to ask for, grant or deny **permission to do
something**, and to **ask somebody to do something**.

- Posso andare in bagno? (Can I go to the toilet?)
- Puoi chiudere la finestra, per favore? (Can you shut the window, please?)

Let's move on to the verb "**sapere**" (to know / to be able to / can), which
indicates an acquired skill or ability, or the knowledge of something.

- Skill: Io non **so** nuotare. (I can't swim.)
- Skill: Armando **sa** suonare il violino. (Armando can play the violin.)
- Knowledge: Tu **sai** quanti anni ha Matteo? (Do you know how old Mateo is?)

Here are the forms of the verb sapere:

| Pronoun | Verb |
| ------- | ---- |
| io | so |
| tu | sai |
| lui / lei | sa |
| noi | sappiamo |
| voi | sapete |
| loro | sanno |

When talking about a skill or ability, "**sapere**" is almost always **followed
by a verb in the infinitive**". One exception is when we talk about languages.
Here **the verb "parlare" can be omitted**. Have a look at the examples below:

- I miei cugini **sanno** (parlare) tre lingue. (My cousins can speak three
languages.)
