---
title: Expressing abilities - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

To express what we are able to or can do, we have learned the verbs "**sapere**"
and "**potere**". However, there are other ways of expression abilty in Italian.
In this unit we'll learn how to use the expressions "**riuscire a**" and
"**essere capace di**", and when to use which.

- Tu **sei capace di** giocare a tennis? (Do you know how to play tennis?)
- Io **non riesco a** ballare con queste scarpe, mi fanno male. (I cannot dance
in these shoes, they hurt.)

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Essere capace di... | To know how to... |

"**Essere capace di**" This expression always go with the preposition "**di**"
**followed by a verb in the infinite**. It indicates a skill that we have
learned or acquired, just like the verb "**sapere**". In the negative, it means
we are not able to do something because we never learned how to. In the singular
masculine and feminine we use "**capace**", while if we are talking about more
than one person, we use "**capaci**".

- Io sono capace di giocare a tennis. (I can play tennis)
- Sono capace di giocare a tennis perchè ho imparato. (I am able to play tennis
because I learned how to)
- Voi non siste capaci di giocare a tennis. (You -plural- don't know how to play
tennis)
- Non site capaci di giocare a tennis perchè non avete mai imparato. (You
- plural - don't know how to play tennis because you never learned)

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Riuscire a... | Can / manage to... |

**Riuscire a**... The verb "**riuscire**" always goes with the preposition
"**a**" **followed by a verb in the infinitive**. It describes a person's
**physical or mental capacity** to do something. (Careful, this verb is
irregular, we will look at its conjugation soon!)

- Io non riesco a ballare con queste scarpe, mi fanno male. (I cannot dance with
these shoes, they hurt)
- I physically cannot dance (even if I know how to) because the shoes I am
wearing hurt too much.

Here's the conjugation of the verb **riuscire**:

- io **riesco**
- tu **riesci**
- lui/lei **riesce**
- noi **riusciamo**
- voi **riuscite**
- loro **riescono**

The verb "**potere**" can be used when the **capacity or impossibility of doing
something does not depend on us, but on external circumstances**. oBoth "potere"
and "sapere" are followed by a verb in the infinitive.

- Maria non può guidare, ha dimenticado la patente. (Maria can't drive,she
forgot her driving license)
- Maria knows how to drive, but she cannot drive because of external
circumstances: she forgot her driving license.
