---
title: Regular and irregular verbs in the present tense - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

In this unit we will revise some regular and irregular **verb conjugations** and
the **different uses of the present tense** in Italian. Do you remember the
conjugation of the verbs "essere" and "avere"?

As we know, in Italian we can use the present tense to talk about **an action
that happens at the time of speaking**.

- Oggi Alberto lavora da casa. (Today Alberto is working from home)

We can also use the present tense **to talk about our routine**.

- Mi sveglio sempre alle 8 durante la settimana. (I always wake up at 8 a.m
during the weekend)

The present tense can also indicate a **fact that is always true**.

- Ci sono dodici mesi in un anno. (there are twlve months in a year)

We use the present to talk about an action that **started in the past and
continues in the present**. This is usually accompanied by the preposition
"**da**".

- Studio lo spagnolo da tre anni (I've been studying Spanish for three years)

In **spoken language**, there is another use for the present tense: we can use
it to **talk about the future**. Have a look at the examples below, you will
notice that _expressions of time_ indicate **we are talking about the future,
but the verbs are in the present**.

- _Domani_ **esco** con Alice. (I am going out with Alice tomorrow)
- _A luglio_ **andiamo** in Brasile. (We are going to Brazil in July)
- Cosa **fate** il weekend _prossimo_. (What are you doing next weekend)
