---
title: Passato prossimo con avere - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

We ise the passato prossimo to talk about **completed actions** at any time in
the past.

- **Ho visto** quel film la settimana scorsa. (I saw that film last week.)
- Ieri **siamo usciti** con i nostri amici. (Yesterday we went out with our
friends.)
- L'anno scorso Anna **ha visitato** il Giappone. (Last year Anna visited
Japan.)

There are two ways of forming the **passato prossimo**:

- The present tense of **avere** followed by a **past participle**: Ieri **ho
visto** Andrea. (I saw Andrea yesterday.)
- The present tense of **essere** followed by a **past participle**: **Siete
usciti** sabato sera? (Did you go out on Saturday night?)

We will learn when to use "**avere**" and "**essere**" in the next unit. For
now, let's look at how to form the past participle of verbs. For regular verbs
in -**are** we replace "-are" with "-**ato**" (guardare - guardato). For
-**ere** verbs we replace "-ere" with "-**uto**" (vendere - venduto). For
-**ire** verbs we replace "-ire" with "-**ito**" (finire - finito).

- _guardare_: io **ho guardato** (I watched / have watched)
- _vendere_: tu **hai venduto** (you sold / have sold)
- _finire_: lui/lei **ha finito** (he / she finished / has finished)
- _mangiare_: noi **abbiamo mangiato** (we ate / have eaten)
- _sapere_: voi **avete saputo** (you knew / have known)
- _sentire_: loro **hanno sentito** (they heard / have heard)

Take in account htat some very common verbs have irregular past participles.
Here are some examples:

- to see: **vedere** - **visto**
- to do: **fare** - **fatto**
- to say: **dire** - **detto**
- to read: **leggere** - **letto**
