---
title: Passato prossimo con essere - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

To talk about the past we can use "**avere**" OR "**essere**" + **past
participle**. Now we are going to learn when to use one verb or the other. Have
a look at the following sentences:

- **Ho visto** quel film settimana scorsa. (I saw that film last week)
- Ieri **siamo usciti** con i nostri amici. (Yesterday we went out with our
friends)

We always use the verb "**avere**" with the verbs that can be followed by a
direct object:

- Ieri **ho visto _Andrea_**. (I saw Andrea yesterday)
- Oggi **abbiamo mangiato _una pizza_**. (We ate a pizza today)
- L'anno scorso, Anna **ha visitato _il Giappone_**. (Last year, Anna visited
Japan)

We use the verb "**essere**" with **reflexive verbs** (verbs we use when we
perform ana ction on ourselves). As you can see, "essere" goes between the
pronoun and the past participle.

- **Mi sono svegliata** alle 6. (I woke up at 6.)
- **Ci siamo alzati** tardi oggi. (We got up late today.)
- **Ti sei lavata** i denti? (Did you brush your teeth?)

The past participle that follows the verb "**essere**" agrees in number and
gender with the subject of the sentence. Have a look at these sentences:

- **Lei** si è svegliat**a** alle 6.
- **Giulia e Marcello** si sono alzat**i** tardi.

We also use the verb "**essere**" with most of the verbs taht are not followed
by a direct object. These are often verbs of movement. Have a look at some
common ones:

- andare (to go)
- venire (to come)
- arrivare (to arrive)
- uscire (to leave)

For example:

- Ieri sono andato a correre
- Oggi siamo arrivati tardi

To sumarize... To talk about our past actions, we use:

- **avere** with verbs that can be followed by a direct object. The participle
doesn't change, (i.e.: Lei ha mangiato una pizza)
- "**essere**" with reflexive verbs and most of the verbs that _are not_
followed by a direct object, like verbs of movement. The past participle changes
according to the number and gender of the subject. (i.e.: Loro si sono svegliati
alle 6 e sono andati a lavoro alle 8.)
