---
title: Expressions of time (2) - A1 - Italian
type: default
layout: page
child: Languages
fold: Italian
---

Now that we can talk about past actions, it's time to learn some **time words**
and words that we might use when we use the **past tense**.

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Ieri | Yesterday |
| L'altro ieri | The day before yesterday |

When we want to talk about last week, last year, etcetera, we use the word
"**scorso / scorsa**" (last) before or after the word we are describing.

- la settimana scorsa / la scorsa settimana
- l'anno scorso / lo scorso anno
- il mese scorso / lo scorso mese

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| La settimana scorsa | Last week |

When we want to talk about what happened an hour ago, a week ago, etc. we use
the word "**fa**" after the expression of time.

- un'ora fa
- una settimana fa
- due mesi fa
- un anno fa

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Una settimana fa | A week ago |
| Già | Already |

"Già" (already) splits the "passato prossimo" in two, it **always** goes in
between the verb "avere" or "essere" and the past participle. This is the same
for the two expressions we will see on the next screens: "appena" (just) and
"non ancora" (not yet). Have a look at the examples below:

- Ho **già** portato fuori la spazzatura. (I've already taken out the rubbish)
- Ho **appena** visto Mauro. (I've just seen Mauro)
- Non ho **ancora** lavato i piatti. (I haven't washed the dishes yet)

| Italian | Meaning |
| ------- | ------- |
| Appena | Just |
| Non... Ancora | Not ... yet |
| Ancora | Still |

We use "ancora" (still) only in the present tense since it refers to something
that is still happening. If we want to say that something isn't happening or
hasn't happened yet, we use "non... ancora" (not yet) in the present and past
tense. Have a look at the structure of the sentences below:

- verb in the present tense + "**ancora**": Ho **ancora** mal di testa.
- "**non**" + "avere - essere" + "**ancora**" + past participle (if it's a past
action): **Non** ho **ancora** lavato i piatti.

As you might already know, some past participles are irregular. Before we carry
on, let's learn new ones:

- to write: **scrivere** - **scritto**
- to close: **chiudere** - **chiuso**
- to open: **aprire** - **aperto**
- to reply: **rispondere** - **risposto**
- to drink: **bere** - **bevuto**
- to lose: **perdere** - **perso**
