---
title: Fifth Generation - Operating Systems - Computer Science
type: default
layout: page
child: Computer Science
fold: Operating Systems
---

Ever since detective Dick Tracy started talking to his "two-way radio wrist
watch" in the 1940s comic strip, people have craved a communication device they
could carry around wherever they went. The first real mobile phone appeared in
1946 and weighed some 40 kilos. You could take it wherever you went, as long as
you had a car in which to carry it.

The first true handheld phone appeared in the 1970s and, at roughly one
kilogram, was positively featherweight. It was affectionately known as "the
brick". Pretty soon everybody wanted one. Today, mobile phone penetration is
close to 90% of the global population. We can make calls not just with our
portable phones and wrist watches, but soon with eyeglasses and other wearable
items. Moreover, the phone part is no longer that interesting. We receive an
email, surf the web, text our friends, play game, navigate around heavy traffic
\- and do not even think twice about it.

While the idea of combining telephony and computing in a phone-like device has
been around since the 1970s also, the first real smartphone did not appear until
the mid-1990s when Nokia released the N9000, which literally combines two mostly
separated devices: a phone and a **PDA** (Personal Digitial Assistant). In 1997,
Ericsson coined the term _smartphone_ for its GS88 "Penelope".

Now that smartphones have become ubiquitous, the competition between the various
operating system is fierce and the outcome is even less clear in the PC world.
At the time of writing, Google's Androi is the dominant operating system with
Apple's iOS a clear second, but this was not always the case and all might be
different again in just a few years. If anything is clear in the world of
smartphones, it is that it is not easy to stay king of the mountain for long.

After all, most smartphones in the first decade after their inception were
running **Symbian** OS. It was the operating system for choice for popular
brands like Samsung, Sony Ericsson, Motorola and especially Nokia. However,
other operating systems like **RIM**'s Blackberry OS (introduced for smartphones
in 2002) and Apple's iOS (released for the first **iPhone** in 2007) started
eating into Symbian's market share. Many expected that RIM would dominate the
business market, while iOS would be the king of the consumer devices. Symbian's
market share plummeted. In 2011, Nokia ditched Symbian and announced it would
focus on Windows Phone as its primary platform. For some time, Apple and RIM
were the toast of the town (although not nearly as dominant as Symbian had
been), but it did not take very long for Android, a Linux-based operating system
released by Google in 2008, to overtake all its rivals.

For phone manufacturers, Android had the advantage that it was open source and
available under a permissive license. As a result, they could tinker with it and
adapt it to their own hardware with ease. Also, it has a huge community of
developers writing apps, mostly in the familiar Java programming language. Even
so, the past years have shown that the dominance might not last, and Android's
competitors are eager to claw some of its market share.
