---
title: Introduction - Emacs
type: default
layout: page
child: Guides
fold: Emacs
---

If you imagine the span of the modern computing era beginning in the 1960s, then
Emacs has been there longer than just about everything else. It was firstly
written by RMS as a set of macros on top of another editor, called TECO, back in
1976. TECO is now mostly remembered for being even more obtuse and hard to
understand than Emacs and DOS-era WordPerfect combined. Since then, there have
been many competing implementations of Emacs but today you're only likely to
encounter XEmacs and GNU Emacs.

I will only cover GNU Emacs. Once upon a time, XEmacs was the more advanced and
feature rich editor, but this is no longer the case: from Emacs 22 GNU emacs is
the best Emacs out there. The history of Xemacs and GNU Emacs is an interesting
one. It was one of the first major forks in a free software project and both
XEmacs and GNU Emacs are developed in parallel to this day.

Because of Emacs' age there are a number of... oddities. Weird choices of
terminology and historical anachronisms persist because in most cases Emacs was
_ahead_ of the editor/IDE curve for many decades and thus, had to invent its own
terminology for things. There are talks of replacing Emacs' own vernacular with
words familiar to everyone, but that is still a long way off.

Despite the lack of marketing, a small core of Emacs developers, the
anachronisms and terminology that predates the modern Personal Computing-era,
there are many people out there who just _love using Emacs_. When Sublime Text
showed off its mini-map feature (a miniature display of the source code) someone
immediately coded up a minimap package doing the same thing in Emacs. In fact,
it is this extensibility that attracts some to - and repels others from - Emacs.

This section will be an introduction, we'll talk about about its terminology and
what Emacs means to a lot of people.
