---
title: What is C?
type: default
layout: page
child: Programming
---

Before we begin to write programs in C, it would be interesting to find out what
really is C, how it came into existence and how does it compare with other
computer languages. In this chapter, we will briefly outline these issues.

Four important aspects of any language are the way it stores data, the way it
operates upon this data, how it accomplishes input and output and how it lets
you control the sequence of execution of instruction in a program. We would
discuss the first three of these building blocks in this chapters.

## What is C?

C is a programming language developed at AT & T's Bell Laboratories of USA in
1972. It was designed and written by a man named Dennis Ritchie. In the late
seventies C began to replace the more familiar languages of that time like PL/I,
ALGOL, etcetera. No one pushed C. It wasn't made the '_official_' Bell Labs
language. Thus, without any advertisement C's reputation spread and its pool of
users grew. Ritchie seems to have been rather surprised that so many programmers
preferred C to older languages like FORTRAN or PL/I, or the newer ones like
Pascal and APL. But, that's what happened.

Possibly why C seems so popular is because it is reliable, simple and easy to
use. Moreover, in an industry where newer lagnuages, tools and technologies
emerge and vanish day in and day out, a language that has survived for more than
6 decades has to be really good.

An opinion that is often heard today is "_C has been already superceded by
languages like C++, C# and Java, so why bother to learn C today_". I seriously
beg to differ with this opinion. There are several reasons for this:

- Learning C++ or Java directly is much more complicated. This is because while
learning these languages, you have things like classes, objects, inheritance,
polymorphism, templates, exception handling, references, etcetera, to deal apart
from knowing the actual language elements. Learning these complicated concepts
when you are not even comfortable with the basic language elements is like
putting the cart before the horse. Hence, people should first learn all the
language elements very thoroughly using the C language before migrating to C++,
C# or Java. Though this two step learning process may take more time, at the end
of you will definitely find it worth the trouble.

- C++, C# or Java make use of a principle called Object Oriented Programming
(OOP) to organise the program. This organising principle has lots of advantages
to offer. But even while using this organising principle, you would still need a
good hold over the language elements of C and the basic programming skills.

- Major parts of popular operating systems like Windows, Linux, BSD are still
written on C. This is because even today, when it comes to performance (speed of
execution) nothing beats C. Moreover, if you want to extend the operating system
to work with new devices, you'll need to write drivers. These drivers are
exclusively written in C.

- At times when we want to interact very closely with hardware devices, C is
perfect for the task as it provides several languages elements that make this
interaction feasible without compromising the performance.
